---
category: articles
layout: default
title: IQ, Smarts, Brains, Guts and the Likes
---

## IQ, Smarts, Brains, Guts and the Likes

I've had a lot of people call me smart. I never understood it as a compliment, but I was aware of the statistics that made it possible.

I come from a rather interesting family. My father works in IT, after having studied electrical engineering and forgotten it. He spent some time in the US in the 1990s when IT was just starting to heat up. His p

There are a few things I've done in the recent past that could possbily be considered smart. The first was hiding the steel plate that forms the basis of the PCBite system under the ESD mat on my table. That way, magnets in the PCB clamps didn't stick to the plate as powerfully, making it easier to use. The steel sheet also presented a short-circuit hazard, and having it hidden under the mat defused that danger, and was also aesthetically pleasing. I was very surprised to learn that no one else had come up with this before judging by the reaction I got on the internet. The second had to do with an inflatable mattress that a friend was using when he stayed over. The first couple of nights were rather painful, since the mattress, rubbing against the floor, created the same annoying noise that one gets when pinching a fully inflated balloon. I suggested flipping the mattress, so the side that was rubbing against the floor would now be the one that would be slept on. The other side, being intended for that purpose, was softer and was less likely to awaken sleeping people, because the person using the mattress moved to a more comfortable position. Some skepticism was expressed by both parties, but it was decided that it might be worth trying. To some surprise, the solution worked, resulting in eight further nights' worth of good sleep. This incident is a fine example of trying things that sound stupid just to see if they might work, and in some cases, they do. The third was gathering shipping money. Sending a package across the world is not cheap, and DHL wanted €60 to send a 10kg package to south Asia. I was splitting the bill with a friend, who also wanted to include a few things in the package. Even then, the prospect of each of us having to fork out €30 was not pleasant. Around the same time, I was requested to do some PCB design work, for which I would be paid. Since I already had a day job and was up to my neck in projects, my willingness to take on the work was low. However, I'd been pushing the recipient of the package to learn KiCAD for a while, and I realized I could work out a nice triangle where we all got what we wanted. The recipient would do the KiCAD work for a sum amounting to the shipping cost, which would be sent to me, so I could send the package over. It worked out wonderfully. The client got his work done, I got the shipping money, and the recipipent will get the package.

